Add explainer and server requirements for Referrer-Provided Prefetch Proxies (#428)
jeremyroman/alternate-loading-modes: referrer_provided_prefetch_proxies_draft.md

# Explainer: Referrer-Provided Prefetch Proxies

> This proposal is an early design sketch by the Chrome Prefetch Proxy team to describe the problem below and solicit feedback on the proposed solution. It has not been approved to ship in Chrome.

Reviewer: Let's add a one liner description to here, so people don't need to scroll down to even understand if they're interested in this.

Author: Done.

### Specifying a standard for privacy-preserving prefetch proxies

* **Should the referrer-provided proxy take precedence over the UA IP anonymization implementation when all three speculation rule requirements are listed in a rule?**  
  Yes: the site is explicitly providing a resource for the UA. If cost is a concern, this prevents the UA from paying for IP anonymization itself.  
* **What network protocol should UAs use to connect to a proxy?**  
  An encrypted version of HTTP CONNECT (HTTPS, H/2, H/3). Connection should be encrypted from the UA to the proxy and from the proxy to the origin server.  
* **Privacy standards for proxy implementations**  
  Additional privacy requirements are discussed in the attached document on proxy server requirements.

### Token handling algorithm for CONNECT requests

* **How do site developers control which tokens are used by a UA in a specific request?**  
  Proposal: it shouldn’t matter exactly which token a UA uses, the site should provide as many tokens as there are prefetch candidates.  
* **What happens if a speculation rules JSON document doesn’t provide exactly as many tokens as there are prefetch candidates?**  

>   Proposal: UA will select and remove a token at random from the ordered set of tokens and use that token for a CONNECT request. If the set is empty, the “create navigation params” algorithm should fail and print a warning to the console.  

Reviewer: I thought it was one token for all requests.

A token per prefetch seems unworkable for document rules. And even for URL lists rules where a URL may be speculated multiple times.

Author: That's useful to know, we do want to cover those use cases if they're cross-origin. It sounds like the proxy operator should verify the token and verify that the target URL matches the rule? That would let us use one token for many URLs covered under a single rule.

Are there any other constraints about speculation rules that would help site & proxy operators design a token scheme?

Reviewer 2: Ah, looks like I have the same question immediately above this. I don't have much to add here except that I agree that one token per request is unworkable for the web, so we'd need one to rule them all. Why is the token schema more complicated because of this?

Author: It's manageable complexity. The site/proxy would likely additionally track:
- What URLs the token is eligible to prefetch
- How many times the token has been used
- Client IP association with the token

Just some additional measures to prevent token reuse and abuse of the site's proxy.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, OK so what is the result of this thread? Are we keeping the one-token-per-request approach? You mentioned that the site would have to track "how many times the token has been used", which implies reuse to the tune that me and @tunetheweb were pushing for. But then below I see:

> What if a site developer wants to use the same token for every prefetch request?**
> Proposal: Call this something else to distinguish from the temporary token use case. Open to naming suggestions.

And the proposal still indicates that the set of tokens is monotonically decreasing with each request.

----

Finally, have we preflighted this design past any partners to see if the complexity is actually compatible with their design? Was Mozilla envisioning this kind of approach when they expressed interest? (Maybe @zcorpan knows).

Author: Updated the token handling proposal:
- If the rule has only one authorization token in its set:
  - Attach the token to each execution, do not consume the token
- Else if the rule has >1 authorization tokens in its set:
  - Select a token at random from the set and remove it from the set

I'll email Simon to ask about token handling and this explainer generally.

* **What if a site developer wants to use the same token for every prefetch request?**  
  Proposal: Call this something else to distinguish from the temporary token use case. Open to naming suggestions.

## Considered alternatives

### Status quo: browser-provided proxies only

> * Expensive for browsers to maintain and offer.  
> * Trade-off between privacy and cost: using a single proxy server reveals information about the target sites to the proxy; using a two-hop proxy chain hides more information but is more expensive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Using a single proxy server reveals information about the target sites to the proxy
* Using a two-hop proxy chain hides more information but is more complex.
* Keeping this as an opt-in, off-by-default for privacy reasons severely limits it's use.
* Expensive for browsers to maintain and offer.
```

Author: Added.

      "requires": [
        "anonymous-client-ip-when-cross-origin",
        "use-referrer-provided-prefetch-proxy",
        "prefetch-proxy-authorization-tokens"
      ],
      "referrer_provided_prefetch_proxy": "https://prefetch.bar.com",
      "proxy_authorization_tokens": ["EXAMPLE_TOKEN"]
    }
  ]
}
</script>
```

### Parsing model

A UA should parse the new keys by:

1. Let *referrerProvidedPrefetchProxyURL* be an empty URL.  
2. If input\["referrer\_provided\_prefetch\_proxy"\] exists:  
   1. If input\["referrer\_provided\_prefetch\_proxy"\] is not a valid URL string:  
      1. The user agent may report a warning to the console indicating that the referrer-provided URL was not understood.  
      2. Return null.  
   2. Set *referrerProvidedPrefetchProxyURL* to input\["referrer\_provided\_prefetch\_proxy"\].  
3. Let *proxyAuthorizationTokens* be an empty set.  
4. If input\["proxy\_authorization\_tokens"\] exists, append input\["proxy\_authorization\_tokens"\] to *proxyAuthorizationTokens*.

### Processing model

We will add the following items to the definition of a cross-origin prefetch IP anonymization policy struct:

* Referrer-provided prefetch proxy, a URL  

> * Proxy authorization tokens, an ordered set of (ASCII strings?)

Reviewer 2: Are we unsure whether they'll be ASCII? What format are we accepting the tokens in? base64? something else?

Author: Updated to strings, with a link to https://infra.spec.whatwg.org/#strings.

Second, **the user agent should not selectively send prefetch requests based on client PII, or include PII in prefetch requests** to avoid leaking information about PII. When the referrer and the proxy are run by the same party, that party can identify which prefetches are requested by the referring page and not sent to the proxy. This can indirectly leak PII that the user agent uses in the decision to prefetch, like the presence of a cookie for a particular site. Including PII in prefetch requests, like cookies or service workers, may directly leak user identity to origin servers.

See the **Security and Privacy Questionnaire** section below for more information.

## Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition

* **Firefox:** No public position. Firefox engineers originally suggested this feature in March 2025: [https://github.com/WICG/nav-speculation/issues/368](https://github.com/WICG/nav-speculation/issues/368).  
* **Safari:** No public position.  

> * **Edge:** No public position.

Reviewer 2: Have you filed standards position issues?

Author: No, I haven't.

Should I file them at this stage? [Blink > Launching Features > Getting Wider Review](https://www.chromium.org/blink/launching-features/wide-review/) suggested getting formal standards positions around OT / I2S time.

Reviewer 2: Eh, I'd probably do it sooner than later honestly.

Author: Sounds good. I can file them after this is merged so that I can include a proper link to the explainer.
